@$Id: sqfsdmount.initd/README.textile,v 1.1 2012/05/11 02:51:29 -tclover Exp $@

Need dependancies is not mandatory, if and only if, @lib${arch}@ and usr are mounted in a initramfs, 
otherwise you might run into big troubles for two reasons: 
* rc uses a tmpfs mounted on @/lib${arch}/rc/init.d@ to store states of running services and 
* many services need binaries/libraries from usr when booting up.

Actually, without an initramfs one can get aufs+squashfs working without an issue if you ensure: 
usr and @lib${arch}@ get mounted as earlier as possible with/without localmount help. This initservice 
will do the trick putting usr and @lib${arch}@ first in the config file because a few (boot) services 
are rushing (especially with rc_parallel) to get userspace ready. 
Additionaly, one could disable rc_parallel and add more services in the `before' line if need be.

*Note*: those two considerations are not true anymore with >=openrc-0.10 which moved `/lib/rc/init.d'
to `/run/openrc'; remain the splash cachedir.

*Note*: @/etc/con.d/sqfsdmount@ configuration variables:

* sqfsd_{sys,local} is a sufix for system/local which speaks of itself, one should to put squashed 
dirs related to system in @sfqd_sys@, e.g. @/usr:/sbin:/bin:/opt@, and local ones in the other 
as @sqfsd_local@ dirs will be unmounted right way before stopping the init service.
* @sqfsdir@ is the root directory location for .sfs images and mount points for aufs rw/ro branches. 
* @sys_umount@ enable umounting system wide squashed directories before stopping service.
* @sqfsd_rebuild@ rebuild local squashed directories before stopping service, similar to sqfsd_local

*Note*: systemd, or even upstart, users have to make their own way/script for this!

@vim:fenc=utf-8:ci:pi:sts=0:sw=4:ts=4:@
